So welcome back, guys.
Now in this section of the course, we're going to understand the concept of births and how we can manipulate
the mammary at the board level.
So most programming languages provide developers to manipulate memory at the finest granularity level
of one bite.
That is, the mainstream programming languages like C, C++, Java Python provides the data type of
the smaller size, which is in type the size of the cardinal type we already know is one bite.
So in the mainstream programming languages such as C, C++, Java, you cannot have a data type whose
size is a smaller than one byte.
So it simply means that your program cannot manipulate memory less than one byte using primitive or
inbuilt genotypes.
But sometimes there arises some problem statement, which requires us to manipulate memory at a bit
level instead of byte level.
So a bit is nothing, but it is either zero or one virales logical operators to manipulate memory at
the bit level.
So use case of being able to manipulate the memory at the bit level is that that we use a Boolean type
data type to see yes or no in any mainstream programming.
Language and size of the Boolean is four bytes on most compilers and most programming language.
So since Boolean data type is associated only with two types of responses that it is either yes or no,
it is either on or off.
So why not just use a bit to track Abule instead of Sense, which also has two states that is either
a to zero or one?
So but manipulation makes tracking of a set of Boolean very easy, and we were going to see this shortly.
So it is actually very important from the interview perspective that you are often asked questions in
which you are tested that whether you are able to manipulate the memory at the board level or not.
In other words, you are tested whether you know, better programming or not in the field of system
programming and in embedded systems able to manipulate the memory and the level is very essential and
important.
So in this section, we will do some interactions as an exercise on bit manipulation because bit programming
forms are very important part of the interview process.
We will also convert certain questions which are often asked in the interview on which programming.
So before we proceed further in this course, please memorize the Boolean algebra concepts, such as
the concept of an R and not operators.
You must have learned some Boolean algebra in your school or academics, and there you must have learned
the concept of engaged Argueta and not get so mainstream programming languages such as C R C++ provide
some in-built Bitwise operators.
That is, these are those operators which can be used to manipulate memory at the level.
So every data type is stored in the computer's memory in terms of bits.
That is, every data is stored in the computer's memory in the sequence of bits.
So, for example, do you have a 16 bit integer a whose value is one two three four in the computer's
memory?
You just convert this decimal number into binary format and whatever binary number you get, simply
visualize that that particular binary number is stored in the computer's memory in the following format.
You have the most significant bit at the left and the law a significant bit on the right.
Here left means the lower side of the memory address.
So this array of zeros and ones actually represents the snapshot of a part of computer memory, which
stores the integer number one two three four in the binary format.
And since it is computer memory, therefore it would claim to have some address.
Let's say the starting address of this computer's memory is nothing, let's say two thousand.
I have just taken a random number, and since this variable is a 16 bit variable, which means that
the size of this variable is two bytes.
Therefore, the ending address of this chunk of memory would going to be two thousand.
To remember, every bite has an address so many times in the interview process, I have asked the students
to print the number into its equivalent binary form.
And to my surprise, what they start doing is that they start converting the number one two three four
into its equal and binary format.
So let's say we have a number one two three four.
They implement the logic to convert decimal number to binary number and whatever by the number.
The guy at the store, those sequence of bits into an.
Added, And then they print the area, so it simply means that that they do not have the clarity that
every data that is supported by the programming language, whether it is U.N. 16 or whether it is a
string or whatever it is, Kyle, at the end of the day, it is stored in the computer's memory as a
sequence of bits.
So you do not convert anything into its binary form, it is stored in the computer's memory already
in the binary form.
All you need to do is that to manipulate this memory, which is referenced by the variable of type unsigned
in 16.
All right.
So address of the wearable is nothing, but it is two thousand that does this particular address.
So using bit level programming, you can manipulate the individual bits of this chunk of memory.
For example, if I ask you to change this particular birds from one to zero, then using bit level programming,
you can do that.
So every data type, whether it is under 16 or whether it is cat, a star or whether it is string in
C++ or whether it is user defined or die, or whether it is double or whether it is flawed.
At the end of the day, all information is stored in the computer's memory as a sequence of bits.
The more significant bit has the lower address.
In this case, we assume that the starting address of this chunk of memory is 2000, whereas the least
significant bit resides at the heart address, which is the address 2002.
All right.
Always try to visualize the computer's memory as an array of bytes, and every bite has an address as
we move towards right, the address of the memory locations increases.
So always strive to visualize the computer's memory in this way.
Here also, we are assigning the lower address that is 2000 to the more significant bit of this chunk
of memory, and we are assigning the lower address that is 2002 to the least significant bit of this
chunk of memory.
Second point that I would like to bring out is that memory is byte addressable.
It simply means that every bite of the memory will going to have an address.
Bits don't have addresses, it's the bite that have addresses.
All right.
So if the starting address of this chunk of memory, we'd say two thousand, then count it bits from
the starting position that is one two three four five six seven eight.
So starting position of this particular bed would have an adverse 2001 because these Edwards comprises
of one bites.
All right.
So every bite of a memory has an address.
If somebody ask you that here, what is the address of this particular bed in our memory?
The answer is simple that it do not have any address.
Bits do not have addresses, only bytes have addresses.
All right.
Similarly, if there is one more bit here, let's say one, then two thousand two would be the starting
address of that bit.
All right.
So now going further, the and operate on the program language is often represented by the ampersand
sign.
The order operator is often represented by this street pipe sign.
The complement operator are also called the nugget operator is represented by this tilde.
So, for example, if it is represented in the computer memory as one zero one, then tilde a would
going to be zero one zero.
All right.
So this is called complement operator or negate operator.
It simply flips the bits in the computer's memory.
Then the next operator is the Zaa operator.
XLR operator is represented by the symbol.
So essentially, we are performing the zone operation between A and B.
Then we have shift operators and there are two types of shift operators the right shift operator and
the left shift operator.
Right shifting of the operator means that you are dividing an integer number by two.
Four.
For example, if it is 16 and if you perform right shift operator on this number by one, then 16 is
represented in the computer's memory as one, followed by a four zeros.
All right.
So if you perform right, shift on the variable e, then the birds which represented represented in
the computer's memory would get shifted by one position two words right?
So this pattern of birds will now become one, followed by three zeros.
That is, you can visualize it like like all these other birds have shifted towards the right by one
position.
All right.
Similarly, we have a left shift operator.
If you perform a left shift on the variable E, then from this bit pattern, you can visualize as if
this sequence of bits have been shifted towards left by one position.
So the resultant bit pattern would become one, followed by four zero again.
That is, if we get the horizontal pattern because we have perform right shift and then left shift.
All right.
So if you notice right, shifting of an integer variable means that we are dividing the variable by
two.
So this represented 16, this would represent it because we have right shifted it, whereas this would
again represent 16 because we have left shifted it.
All right.
So guys, there is a little homework for you.
So please browse the internet and learn about these operators if you are not already familiar.
We shall be going to learn some advanced learning in this course regarding bit programming.
And isn't homework?
Just pick up a pen and paper and write a table for C is equal to SRB.
We are a b and C represent bits.
So now in the next lecture we do, we will discuss something more about.
This is our operator.
Require some special attention.